Thank you for downloading this script.

Please read this file prior to running it!

=====================================================

0. DISCLAIMER

This script was created for home use. It's primarily intended for geeks (like me) that enjoy using the CLI.

Do not use it on servers, business systems or other "critical" devices. It hasn't been tested thoroughly and there might still be some bugs.

To conclude, use it at your own risk. I will not be held accountable for any damage or loss it might cause whatsoever. 

Please let me know if you find any inconsistent information in this document so I can update it.

1. INTRODUCTION

This script file contains various functions that enable navigation through a UNIX-like file system.

It also performs history reporting and creating a list of favorite dirs. Both history and favorites can be used for easy navigation to any of the entries.

2. Supported systems

a. Mac OS (OS X)

On Mac OS the "full GUI" mode is supported. This means the script is synchronized with the Finder window. When changing the current directory from terminal, the Finder window is closed and then re-opened in the new directory. The inverse operation (changing the current directory in terminal when modifying it in Finder) is not supported.

b. Linux

On the Linux version the "CLI-only" mode is supported. This means the script does not synchronize the current directory of the terminal with the one from the explorer window. The reason for this implementation is that there are several distributions of Linux and the explorer tool might be differ from one to another.

However a GUI mode might be available depending on distribution. For example on OpenSUSE it is possible to run the CLI-only script in a terminal embedded in the explorer window in KDE. Unlike the Mac OS script version the synchronization is made by the system and not by script.

c. Windows

The Linux script version could also be run in Windows using a Unix-CLI emulator like Git Bash. However there might be some limitations in functionality. So far I have run a few tests on Windows and the only thing that I noticed is that the script sometimes runs pretty slow. I cannot explain why this happens especially as I only ran it in CLI mode using Git Bash. The reason might be that it is not being run on a native Bash but on an emulator.

3. INSTALLATION

I. On Mac OS:

Clone from the repo. Then ensure you are in the master branch and follow these steps:

a. Copy the script to a chosen location. If the location differs from the user home directory (~) please change the variable $scriptDir to the chosen path (use an absolute path). This variable is used for creating the script files (e.g. persistent history) in the given directory. Although not mandatory I strongly recommend to use same folder with the one where the script resides.
b. Configure .bashrc or .bash_profile to load the functions automatically (when opening a new terminal window) by using the source command.
c. Restart the terminal once ready and start using the functionality.

II. On Linux/Windows

Same steps, however instead of the master branch use linuxMaster.

4. KNOWN ISSUES/BUGS

1) When in navigation mode directories that contain spaces in their name cannot be accessed when entering the full directory name. For example if you have a directory called 'Test Test' you cannot access it by entering this name in the navigation mode.

A workaround would be entering a wildcard, like for example Te* (and without ' or " as these are interpreted literally by function).

However even with this workaround if you have directories that begin with the same letters there might still be issues. For example if you also have a 'Test' directory, if you enter Te* this directory will be the one accessed and not 'Test Test'. And as mentioned before, even if you enter 'Test T'* the directory 'Test Test' will still not be accessed as the expression will be split into 2 arguments ($1 is 'Test and $2 is T'*) and only the first one will be passed to the goToDir function.

The "healthy" workaround for the moment would be exiting the navigate mode and running the goToDir function directly with the directory name (either putting 'Test Test' as argument or using a wildcard). This will work and you will be able to access the target folder.

You can also prevent this issue by avoiding putting spaces in the directory names. I warmly recommend this approach. I also recommend that (unless specifically required) no special characters are used in a file or directory name. By this I mean characters other than: literals, numbers and underscore.

As soon as a fix is found to this bug I will update the repository accordingly so you can retrieve the corrected code. Sorry for any inconvenience!

2) When running the goto function there are cases when either the Finder window is not re-opened (in the new directory) or when the window is re-opened but inactive (it cannot be accessed when pressing CMD-TAB or when typing Finder in the Spotlight).

Workarounds available are:
- for the case when the window does not appear: run the goTo function again with argument '.' (current directory)
- for the case when the window is inactive: click with the mouse on the window

Currently I don't have any clue about how this bug can be fixed. If you have any ideas please feel free to share! Thank you.

3) It is currently not possible to use ~ in navigation mode for visiting the home directory.

However there is a much better alternative: just hit ENTER and you will
immediately be brought to the home directory.


If any other bugs are discovered please feel free to comment on my Github page (https://github.com/LiviuCP) or write me an e-mail (liviucst@gmail.com).

5. FUNCTIONALITY

Following features are contained in the script:
- navigation functionality for changing the current directory
- navigation history reporting
- storing directories in a favorites menu
- command executing functionality

To access these functions you need to enter the navigation mode by typing navigate. These features will be detailed in the following sections.

5.1. The goto functionality

Enter navigation mode. Then enter the path of the directory to be visited.

You can enter:
- absolute paths
- relative paths
- paths with wildcards

If no argument is entered the user home directory will be visited.

5.2. The history and favorites menus

Enter navigation mode, then enter < for history or > for favorites.

The history menu keeps track of the:
- recently visited directories
- most visited directories

The favorites menu contains the directories the user previously added to the list of preferred folders. It is not limited in number of entries, however it's recommended to use it for storing the so called entry-point directories (like Desktop, Pictures, Documents, etc). It can also be used for storing paths to temporarily mounted filesystems (like SD cards). If accessing a temporary filesystem make sure it is mounted before doing any access attempt.

When choosing an entry (enter the number and press ENTER) from one of the two menus the chosen directory is automatically visited.

The menus are sorted alphabetically for easy identification of the required entry. 

It is possible to navigate to a specific entry without accessing the menus by entering operator < (for history) or > (for favorites) followed by the entry number in navigation mode. This is a great way of speeding up the access if the user knows "by heart" the entry number of the path to be visited. For example if directory /home/myUserName/Documents has entry number 2 in Favorites the user can enter >2 in navigation mode to visit it. No spaces should be entered between operator and the number. If the string after the operator is not a valid entry number the substring starting with the character after the operator will be considered a directory path and the script will attempt to visit it. If the path is invalid an error will be triggered.

The number of entries of the history menu can be setup for each of the sub-menus by modifying the $rHistMaxRows and $pHistMaxRows variables. However for an efficient use it is recommended not to exceed a total number of 25 entries.

If you cannot find a entry simply enter the required path(s) to navigate to the directory you wish to visit. It is not required to exit the history and favorites menus in order to do this. Any input other than the given range of numbers or the quit (!) is considered regular navigation input. I call this the "input forwarding feature". This feature is present in other menus too.

5.3. Visiting the previous directory

From the navigation menu enter the comma character (,) and press ENTER in order to achieve this. You can run this function as many times as you wish. The system will toggle between the two directories.

Note: if previously entering argument '.' the goToPrevDir function will re-visit the current directory. If no directory had been visited since entering the navigation mode the script will issue a warning and the current directory will remain unchanged.

5.4. Adding a directory to favorites

From navigation mode go to the directory you need to add to favorites. Then simply enter +> and press RETURN. Each directory can only be added once to the favorites menu.

Another way of adding the directory would be executing the addToFavorites function with the dir path as argument (both relative and absolute paths are allowed).

5.5. Removing a directory from favorites

From navigation mode enter -> and press RETURN. A menu will be opened. Choose the entry number of the directory to be removed from favorites. Any other input will be handled as normal navigation input by using the "input forwarding feature" that was previously mentioned.

5.6. Executing commands

It is possible to execute regular shell commands (like cd, ls, etc.) or other scripts from the navigation mode. 

In order to do this you just need to enter the : character followed by the actual command and press ENTER. For example in order to execute 'ls -l' enter ':ls -l'.

To repeat the last executed command just enter the :- characters and press ENTER.

To enter a new command by editing the previously executed one just enter : and press ENTER. This feature is only available on BASH4 so make sure to upgrade the shell in order to use it.

It is also possible to enter the command history menu by typing :< and pressing ENTER. Similar to navigation history by entering a valid number the chosen command is executed.

The command history can also be accessed in edit mode by entering :: and pressing ENTER. In edit mode when the number of a command is entered the string of the command is displayed for editing. After editing and pressing ENTER the new command will be executed. The command execution can be aborted by entering : at the end of the string and pressing ENTER. This feature is only available in BASH4. In BASH3 the menu can be accessed in edit mode however when entering the number of the command to be edited an error will be triggered.

To erase the command history enter :<> and press ENTER. You will not be able to enter the command history menu if no entry is available.

Important note: in navigation mode make sure you launch time consuming commands in the background by using the ampersand (&) unless you need to visualize the output of the executed command on the screen.

5.7. Getting help

All possible navigation options can be viewed by entering the ? character followed by ENTER in navigation mode.

6. THE HISTORY FUNCTIONALITY

Each time a directory is visited, the event is tracked in a history file. There are four files where this tracking is done:
- the recent history file
- the persistent history file
- the consolidated history file
- the excluded history file

In addition to these a command history menu is available, that tracks the most recently executed shell commands in navigation mode. This is different from the standard BASH history as it only tracks the commands initiated in navigation mode, namely the ones preceded by the : character. Currently 2 files are being used for doing this tracking:
- the recent command history file
- the command history file (same as the recent command history file but sorted)

6.1. Recent history

Most recently visited directory paths are mentioned here.

6.2. Persistent history

All paths except the ones from excluded history are mentioned here along with the number of visits. When a new directory is visited the first time on the current day the number of visits is incremented. Further visits on the same day are not taken into account. This prevents unrealistic reporting which might occur if a directory has been entered many times during a day and then remains unvisited for a long time.

Also if the previous directory is the same with the visited directory the persistent history is not updated.

The file is sorted each time it is updated and the most visited paths are added to a consolidated history file.

6.3. Consolidated history

This file consolidates the entries contained in the previous 2 files. A unified interface is provided to the user for accessing the history.

6.4. Excluded history

When a directory is added to favorites its entry from the persistent history file is added to this file. This way the number of visits continues to be tracked (same tracking mechanism as for persistent history) and in the same time the path is separated from consolidated history.

When the directory is removed from favorites the entry is moved back to persistent history with the actual number of visits.

If the directory hadn't been visited prior to adding to favorites (e.g. if adding it by calling the addToFavorites function with the directory path as argument when in another directory) an entry with 0 visits is created in the excluded history file. If the directory is removed from favorites before visiting it the entry is removed both from favorites file and excluded history and nothing is added to persistent history. 

6.5. Command history

As the user executes commands in navigation mode each command is tracked in a dedicated history file. Up to a specific number of commands can be stored. This is determined by the cHistMaxRows variable.

The commands are stored "in order" but duplicates are not allowed. If the maximum number of entries has been reached the least recent command is taken out. The entries are displayed to the user in a sorted fashion so they can easily be found and executed. This occurs in a similar fashion to creating the recent history sub-menu.

It is possible to setup the minimum number of characters a command should contain in order to be stored in the command history file. This is done by setting up the minNrOfCmdChars variable. For example by setting minNrOfCmdChars=10 each command with less than 10 characters will be prevented from being included into the command history. The characters include the spaces but not the : character used for entering the command in navigation mode. This rule can be bypassed if more spaces are being included in the command (if the command has a single word the spaces shluld be added before the word).

For example:
:echo abcd #will not be included in command history (less than 10 characters - a total of 9, including space, excluding : )
:echo  abcd #will be included in command history (2 spaces this time)
:echo #will not be included, no matter how many spaces are entered after echo
:      echo #will be included, there is a total of 10 spaces, 6 spaces before the echo word

7. HANDLING MISSING DIRECTORIES

It can happen that for an entry chosen from one of the 2 above mentioned menus the path doesn't exist anymore. This can happen for various reasons:
- the directory has been deleted
- the directory has been moved, renamed or a combination of both

In this case the user has two options:
- remove the entry from the menus
- remap the path to an existing one (for example when the directory has been renamed) to preserve the number of visits

7.1. Removing the path

When this option is chosen the path is removed from all menus and files. The number of visits is lost.

7.2. Remapping

If the user chooses to remap the path to an existing one, two options are available:
- remap to a path that is not contained in favorites or consolidated history. In this case the path is replaced in the menus with the new path and the number of visits is kept.
- remap to a path that already exists in the menus. In this situation, the no more existing path is removed from the menus. The number of visits of the replacing path is updated only if the removed path had a greater number. For example if the removed path had 5 visits and the replacing path has 2 visits then the number of visits of the replacing path will be updated to 5. If the situation is viceversa it would be as if just removing the no more existing path (section 7.1).

8. MISCELLANEOUS

It is possible to erase all entries from history, which means all history files are cleared. When this happens there are no more entries in the consolidated history menu and viewing that menu is disabled (a warning will be issued by script). However the favorites menu retains its entries, yet the number of visits mentioned in excluded history is 0.

Type !<> in either history or favorites menus and hit ENTER in order to clear all history.